My name is Jutta Treviranus
and the title of my contribution
to this important discussion
is We Count: Fair Treatment, Disability
and Machine Learning.
slide-2
I wanna preface my talk my saying
that my topic is not a specialist topic,
only of concern to people interested
in disability and accessibility.
People with lived experience of disability
are the stress testers of our systems,
including the web.
They are the canaries in the coal mine
for things that will go wrong.
The flip side of this
is that considering disability
offers the innovative choices
that may help us fix the cracks
and shortcomings for everyone.
slide-3
The late Stephen Hawking predicted
that we were entering a dangerous time.
This was before COVID-19.
Seasoned prognosticators seemed to agree
that this disruption is one of many
that will come at an accelerated pace.
The web is host to what remains
of our common conversations and deliberation.
Our collective move online during the pandemic means
that this responsibility has become weightier.
Our web tools are not neutral.
How we design them influences their uses
in subtle and blatant ways.
Combine web tools with the power tools of AI
and we have a potent mix.
Machine learning may help us amplify the opportunities
but we also amplify the risks.
Machine learning enables us
to do what we are doing more efficiently and effectively.
Before we employ our power tools,
we need to ask what do we want to amplify and automate?
Where are we accelerating to?
What is the ultimate destination
if we go even faster in the direction
our current practices are leading us?
slide-4
I wanna tell you about my pivotal moment of alarm.
slide-5
Back in 2015, I had the opportunity
to test machine learning models
that guide automated vehicles in intersections.
I tested them with an anomalous scenario,
a friend of mine that propels her wheelchair backwards
through an intersection,
effectively but very erratically.
All the models chose to proceed through the intersection
and effectively run my friend over.
Well, the developers said come back
when our models are more mature
and have been exposed to more data about people
in wheelchairs in intersections.
slide-6
When I retested the more mature machine learning models
that had been exposed to a great deal of data
about people in wheelchairs in intersections,
they chose to run her over with greater confidence.
The data gave them confidence
that people in wheelchairs move forward.
slide-7
I realized that the power tools of AI
are unable to handle diversity and complexity.
Unprepared for the unexpected,
they replicate our own inadequacies
and automate and amplify them.
slide-8
And this is more than about automated vehicles.
The same pattern occurs in all automated decisions.
It's more than about artificial intelligence.
slide-9
It is about how we treat small minorities and outliers.
I like to illustrate it in this way.
slide-10
If we were to take all of our preferences
and requirements and plot them
on a multivariate scatterplot,
it would look like a starburst
with about 80% of the needs
and requirements in 20% of the middle.
And the remaining 20% of the needs
and requirements scattered in the 80%
of the remaining space.
slide-11
If you were to look at the dots in the middle,
they're very close together,
meaning they're very similar.
If you were to look at the dots as you move from the center,
they would be further and further apart,
meaning more and more different.
slide-12
As a result of this,
and in part because of Pareto and Richard Koch's 80/20 rule,
design works for anyone that has a need
in the middle,
is difficult as you move from the middle
and design doesn't work
if you were out at that outer edge of our human starburst.
In terms of data,
predictions are highly accurate if your needs
are in the middle,
inaccurate as you move from the middle
and wrong if your needs are at the edge.
slide-13
This pattern affects all of our systems,
whether it is the design of our products and services,
which thanks to Moore's law are improving
in availability, reliability, functionality and cost,
the opposite is true if you have marginalized needs
our systems of research favor the average
and ignore minority needs.
Our education system ranks based
on the average and requires conformance,
our systems of employment attempt
to create replaceable workers,
our democracy is driven by majority rules.
This not only hurts the 20%
with needs at the edge, it hurts our society as a whole.
Because of this pattern, we have mass production,
mass communication, mass marketing,
a popularity push
and our innovation suffers.
We have greater conformance, lock-in
and our flexibility, extensibility,
resilience and responsiveness all suffer.
slide-14
AI ethics has received a great deal
of attention lately because of the discrimination faced
by many minority groups.
There are three main sources of a discrimination.
Discrimination may happen because of data gaps
because people are not represented in data gathering.
They may have no digital traces
because of digital exclusion.
Or inaccurate data proxies are used.
Data may also be misinterpreted as noise
and eliminated to improve performance.
Secondly, there is algorithmic bias
and this can result from human bias that finds its way
into algorithms due to labeling analysis
and interpretation that is used
or it can be due to biased training data.
The much more fundamental discrimination faced
by small minorities and outliers,
including people with disabilities
is the inherent bias in our statistical methods
and how we treat minorities and outliers.
slide-15
The measures we use to assess AI ethics
do no cover the discrimination faced
by people with disabilities.
The primary tools for detecting bias
is to compare the treatment of bounded identity groups
with a default.
From the data perspective,
there are no common bounded identifiers
for people with disabilities.
The only common data characteristic
is distance from the mean,
such that things don't work for you.
Therefore, many people fall through the cracks
or are stranded at the edges of these bounded groups,
making it even more difficult
to achieve fair treatment.
slide-16
These issues are compounded by other vulnerabilities.
If you're highly unique, privacy protections don't work.
The primary protection is de-identifications at source.
If you have highly unique needs,
you can be re-identified.
If you have to request special treatment,
you barter your privacy for the service.
People with disabilities are also most vulnerable
to data abuse and misuse.
Because of this, we need not only privacy protections
but protections against data abuse
and misuse from bad actors,
surveillance capitalism and the state.
slide-17
The entire field of data science
is somewhat problematic if you have a disability.
You face unfair treatment
as subjects of data-driven decisions based
on population data,
barriers to participation
in designing and developing data science
so you can help fix it,
barriers to interpreting the outcomes
of data science and therefore, benefiting from it.
And you're subject to systemic influence
or vicious cycles of discrimination.
slide-18
How's this relevant beyond disability?
slide-19
Traditional means of deciding,
judging and planning no longer work.
slide-20
We live in increasingly complex adaptive systems of systems.
These are changing and unstable,
they're unpredictable, they're entangled.
slide-21
And right now, during this pandemic,
we need to navigate out of danger.
But we are in a complex terrain
with multiple hills and valleys.
slide-22
And because of the way we do things,
we are stuck on the local optima,
rather than reaching that global optima.
The only values are reflected
in our systems are popularity and profit,
meaning we can just keep going up that local hill.
We're optimizing towards homogeneity and conformity
when we need diversity.
And these vicious cycles are intensifying disparity.
slide-23
The only formula to get us out of that local optima
is diversification and collaboration.
We need to include diverse perspectives.
There is no best or winning strategy.
We need to stop doing the same thing over
and over again and we need to work together.
slide-24
We are prone also to cobra effects
or the unintended consequences
of over simplistic solutions to complex problems.
We use linear thinking that only makes things worse.
slide-25
We may be seeing a cobra effect right now
and AI may only intensify this.
slide-26
There's a famous Thomas Friedman graph
that compels us toward greater progress
to avoid economic collapse.
It shows us that technology's adapting
at an exponential rate,
while humans are adapting at a linear rate.
slide-27
I would say the situation is worse.
My contention is that technology
is impeding human adaptability.
We're cushioned from dissonance and diversity
by recommender systems
that recommend things liked by people like us.
We have search engine optimization.
We have a popularity bubble.
We have smart systems that replace human smarts
and we have evidence-based decisions
that favor the majority and homogeneity.
slide-28
My recommendation is that we reconsider the 80/20 rule.
It came about because Pareto noticed
that 80% of land in Italy
was owned by 20% of the population
or what he called the vital few.
He told the emperor of the time
to ignore the 80%
and attend to the vital few.
Koch later turned this into a formula
for quick wins, saying ignore the difficult 20%
who take 80% of the effort.
slide-29
However, who are our current vital few?
If our goal is not greed, quick wins
or gaming the system, but innovation,
diverse perspectives, detecting weak signals,
the difficult 20%, as Koch calls them,
that occupy 80% of the unexplored terrain
are the real vital few.
slide-30
If we design with and consider the needs
of those 20%, we make sure that the 80%
in the middle have room to change.
slide-31
It is out at that outer edge
that we find innovation,
not in the complacent middle.
It is also where we detect weak signals
that disrupt our life.
slide-32
But how will we measure, decide and judge
if we are not using statistical average?
slide-33
One recommendation comes from Gandhi and others.
“The true measure of any society can be found
"in how it treats its most vulnerable members”.
This is more than altruism.
It actually has scientific rationale.
slide-34
What we need to do in our AI
and in our research and in our data analytics
is discover the diverse range,
the edge or the periphery.
slide-35
You may ask what about cost?
slide-36
We've actually found that cost over time
and longevity of the system works better
if you plan with the edge,
rather than planning for only the center,
which becomes brittle and soon reaches end of life.
slide-37
In one of the experiments we've made
to level the playing field
and address the needs of people with disabilities,
we call our lawnmower of justice.
It's a very early model
but what we've tried to do
is to remove the top of the Gaussian curve,
to take away the advantage you have by being similar
to everyone else,
such that the learning model needs
to attend to all of the edges.
slide-38
And what we found is that systems
that value the edge of our human scatterplot adapt
to change and respond to the unexpected,
detect risk, transfer to new contexts,
result in greater dynamic resilience and longevity,
will reduce disparity
and may hold the key to our survival.
slide-39
And I would love to continue the conversation.